Next, we'll look at a data model
that has been successfully used to
retrieve data from large
collections of text and images.
Let's stay with text for now.
Text is often thought of
as unstructured data.
Primarily because it doesn't really
have attributes and relationships.
Instead, it is a sequence of strings
punctuated by line and parent of breaks.
So one is to think of a different
way to find and analyze text data.
In this video, we'll describe that
finding text from a huge collection of
text data is a little different from
the data modules we have seen so far.
To find text,
we not only need the text data itself, but
we need a different structure that
is computed from the text data.
To create the structure,
we'll introduce the notion of the document
vector model which we call a vector model.
Further you will see
that finding a document
is not really an exact search problem.
Here, we'll give a query document and
ask the system to find all
documents that are similar to it.
After this video,
you'll be able to describe
how the similarity is computed and
how it is used to search documents.
Finally, you will see that search engines
use some form of vector models and
similarity search to locate text data.
And you will see that the same principle
can be use for finding similar images.
Let us describe the concept
of a document to an example.
So lets consider three types
of document shown here.
Now we'll create a matrix.
The rows of the matrix stand for
the documents and columns represent
the words in the documents.
We put the number of occurrences
of returning the document in
the appropriate cell of the matrix.
In this case, the count of each term
in each document happens to be one.
This is called the term frequency matrix.
So now that we have created
the term frequency matrix,
which we call tf for short.
We'll create a new vector called the
inverse document frequency for each term.
We'll explain why we need this
vector on the next slide.
First, let's see how it's computed.
The number of documents n here is 3.
The term new occurs
twice in the collection.
So the inverse document frequency or
IDF of the term new
is log to the base 2,
n divided by term count.
That is, log to the base 2,
3 divided by 2, which is 0.584.
We'll show the ideal score for
all six terms here.
Now some of you may wonder why we use
log to the base 2 instead of let's
say log to the base 10.
There is no deep scientific reason for it.
It's more of a convention in
many areas of Computer Science
when many important
numbers are powers of two.
In reality,
log to the base two of x is the same
number as log to the base ten of x
times log to the base two of ten.
The second number, that is log to
the base two of ten is a constant.
So the relative score of IDF does not
change regardless of the base we use.
Now let's understand this
number one more time.
The document frequency of a term is
the count of that term in the whole
collection divided by
the number of documents.
Here, we take the inverse of
the document frequency, so
that n, the number of documents,
is in the numerator.
Now before we continue, let's understand
the intuition behind the IDF vector.
Now suppose you have 100
random newspaper articles and
let's say 10 of them cover elections.
Which means all the others
cover all other subjects.
Now in this article, let's say we'll find
the term election 50 times in total.
How often do you think you'll find
the term is as in the verb is?
You can imagine that it will
occur in all hundred of them and
that too, multiple times.
We can safely assume that
the number of occurrences of is
will be 300 at the very least.
Thus the document frequency of is is six
times the document frequency of election.
But that doesn't sound right, does it?
Is is such a common word that it's
prevalence has a negative impact
on its informativeness.
So, now if you want to
compute the IDF of is and
election, the IDF of is will be far lower.
So, IDF acts like a penalty factor for
terms which are too widely used
to be considered informative.
Now that we have understood
that IDF is a penalty factor,
we will multiply the tf numbers through
the IDF numbers giving us this.
This is a column-wise multiplication
of the tf numbers with the IDF
numbers giving us what we
call the tf-idf matrix.
Therefore for each document, we have
a vector represented here as a row.
So that row represents the relative
importance of each term in the vocabulary.
Vocabulary means the collection of all
words that appear in this collection.
If the vocabulary has 3 million entries,
then this vector can get quite long.
Also, if the number of document
grows let's just say to 1 billion,
then it becomes a big data problem.
Now the last column after
each document of vector here
is the length of the document vector.
Which is really the square root of the sum
of squares of the individual term scores
as shown in the formula.
To perform a search in the vector space,
we write a query just like
we type terms in Google.
Here, the number of terms is three.
Out of which the term
new appears two times.
In fact, this is the maximum frequency
out of all terms in the query.
So we take the document vector of
the query and multiply each term
by the number of occurrences divided by
two which is the maximum term frequency.
Now in this case,
it gives us two non-zero terms.
0.584 and
0.292 for new and york.
Then we compute the length of
the query vector just like we did for
the document vectors
on the previous slide.
Next, we will compute the similarity
between the query vector and each document
with the idea that we'll measure how far
the query vector is from each document.
Now there are many similar functions
defined and used for different things.
A popular similarity measure
is the cosine function,
which measures the cosine function of
the angle between these two vectors.
The mathematical formula for
computing the function is given here.
The intuition is that if
the vectors are identical,
then the angle between them is zero.
And therefore,
the cosine function evaluates to one.
As the angle increases,
the value of the cosine function
decreases to make them more dissimilar.
The way to compute the function is to
multiply the corresponding elements of
the two vectors.
That is the first element
of one with the first
element of the second one and so forth.
And then sum of these products.
Here, the only contributing
terms are from new and
york because, these are the only two
non-zero terms in the query vector.
This sum is then divided by
the product of the document length and
the query length that we
have computed earlier.
Look at the result of the distance
function and you will notice that
the document 1 is much more similar
to the query than the other two.
So while similarity scoring and document
ranking process working effectively,
the method is a little cotton dry.
More often than not users would
like a little more control
over the ranking of terms.
One way of accomplishing this is to put
different weights on each query term.
And in this example, the query term
york has a default weight of one,
times has a weight of two.
And post has a weight of five
as specified by the user.
So relatively speaking,
york has a weight of 1 divided
by 1 + 5 + 2 is equal to 0.125.
Times has a weight of 0.25 and
post has a weight of 0.625.
Now the scoring method we showed
before will change a bit.
The query of vector and its length
were exactly as computed before.
However, now each term in the query
vector is further multiplied by these
relative weights.
In our case,
the term york now has a much higher rate.
So as expected, this will change
the ranking of the documents and
new york post will have the highest rank.
Now similarity search is often used for
images using a vector space model.
One can compute futures from images.
And one common feature
is a scatter histogram.
Consider the image here.
One can create the histogram of the red,
green and
blue channels where histogram is the count
of pixels having a certain density value.
This picture is mostly bright, so the
count of dark pixels is relatively small.
Now one can think of
histograms like a vector.
Very often the pixel values will
be bend before creating a vector.
The table shown is a feature vector
where the numbers for each row have been
normalized with the size of the image
to make the row sum equal to one.
Similar vectors can be computed of
the image texture, shapes of objects and
any other properties.
Thus making a vector space model
significant for unstructured data.